The EU needs modern copyright rules fit for the digital age. The European Commission has presented legislative proposals to make sure that consumers and creators can make the most of the digital world.
Share
The reviewed EU copyright rules consists of a regulation and directive on copyright in the Digital Single Market. It also contains the proposals to implement the Marrakesh treaty in EU law.

Objectives of EU copyright proposals

More cross-border access to content online;
Wider opportunities to use copyrighted materials in education, research and cultural heritage;
A better functioning copyright marketplace.
Furthermore, the Marrakesh treaty implementation will make more books and texts available for people who are visually impaired or have other print disabilities in a format suitable for them.

The proposals will help European copyright industries to flourish in a Digital Single Market and European authors to reach new audiences, while making European works widely accessible to European citizens, also across borders.

The aim is to ensure a good balance between copyright and relevant public policy objectives such as education, research, innovation and the needs of persons with disabilities.

EU copyright package 3 pillars
Download the copyright visual summary (pdf)

1. Better choice and access to content online and across borders

One of the key objectives of the proposals is to increase the availability of works for people across Europe, provide new distribution channels for creators and bring the EU's cultural heritage to the forefront.

To achieve these objectives, the Commission proposes measures to:

Create favourable conditions for cross-border distribution of television and radio programmes online
Increase the availability of audiovisual works on VoD platforms
Facilitate the digitalisation and dissemination of works that are out-of-commerce.
EU copyright proposal access content online films VoD

2. Improved copyright rules on research, education and cultural heritage

Most of the copyright exceptions in EU law are currently optional and do not apply across borders. Also, some of them need to be re-assessed in light of today's technological realities.

The objective of the proposed directive is to modernize the EU rules applicable to key exceptions and limitations in the areas of teaching, research and preservation of cultural heritage, focusing in particular on digital and cross-border uses.

The mandatory exceptions that the proposed directive announces are related to:

Teaching activities
Text and data mining
Preservation of cultural heritage.
Copyright EU museums libraries archives cultural 

3. Achieving a well-functioning marketplace for copyright

The proposed measures aim at creating a fairer market place for online content especially for press publications, online platforms and remuneration of authors and performers. 

The main elements of the proposed directive are:

Related or "neighbouring" right for press publishers
A reinforced position of right holders to negotiate and be remunerated for the online exploitation of their content of video-sharing platforms
Remuneration of authors and performers via new transparency rules.
EU copyright authors transparency remuneration

More content for visually impaired or people with print disabilities

In parallel, two legislative proposals have been adopted for implementation in the EU law of the Marrakesh Treaty:

to facilitate access to published works for persons who are blind, visually impaired, or otherwise print disabled (the Marrakesh Treaty),
to allow people with print disabilities to access books and other print material in formats that are accessible to them.
The proposal for a Directive will establish a mandatory exception and the proposal for a Regulation will permit the cross-border exchange of such copies between the EU and third countries that are parties to the Treaty.

What's next?

The legislative proposals will be discussed by the European Parliament and the Council in early 2017.

