COMMISSION DECISION 
of 19 April 2010 
on the European Commission becoming a partner in the Global Bioenergy Partnership 
(2010/222/EU) 
THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION, 
Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European 
Union, 
Whereas: 
(1) The European Union has stated goals in the energy sector 
of increasing security of supply and reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions from its energy use by increasing the use 
of renewable energy. Bioenergy forms an important part 
of the renewable energy strategy. The Union pursues 
sustainable production of biomass and has adopted 
sustainability criteria for biofuels and bioliquids. 
(2) In the context of its cooperation with international 
partners, including developing countries, the Commission 
is actively engaging in energy dialogues and other forms 
of cooperation on energy issues. The benefits of 
bioenergy will only reach their full potential if other 
countries also pursue bioenergy strategies and 
implement them in a sustainable manner. The realisation 
of sustainable energy production can be significantly 
accelerated by appropriate international frameworks. 
(3) In the G8 Gleneagles Plan of Action of 2005 the G8 
endorsed the launch of a Global Bioenergy Partnership 
to support wider, cost-effective, biomass and biofuels 
deployment, particularly in developing countries. The 
Global Bioenergy Partnership has initiated task forces 
on greenhouse gas methodologies and on sustainability 
with a view to promoting bioenergy in a sustainable 
manner. 
(4) The Chairman of the Global Bioenergy Partnership wrote 
to President Barroso on 12 April 2007 inviting the 
Commission to join the Global Bioenergy Partnership 
and has subsequently repeated this invitation. 
(5) The Commission will, through its participation in the 
Global Bioenergy Partnership, be better able to coor­
dinate its relevant international activities concerning 
bioenergy and related sustainability issues. 
(6) The Global Bioenergy Partnership relies on contributions 
from members. Such contributions are made on a 
voluntary basis and the decision to participate does not 
commit the Commission to financial contributions to 
common budgets, 
HAS ADOPTED THIS DECISION: 
Article 1 
The European Commission (hereafter referred to as ‘the 
Commission’) shall participate as a partner in the Global 
Bioenergy Partnership. 
Article 2 
The Commissioner for Energy, or his designated representative, 
is authorised to sign the Terms of Reference for the Global 
Bioenergy Partnership on behalf of the Commission. 
Done at Brussels, 19 April 2010. 
For the Commission 
Günther OETTINGER 
Member of the Commission
EN L 98/12 Official Journal of the European Union 20.4.2010
