 
EN    EN 
 
 
 
EUROPEAN 
COMMISSION  
Brussels, 3.3.2017  
COM(2017) 109 final 
  
REPORT FROM THE COMMISSION TO THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND 
THE COUNCIL 
on the implementation of Regulation (EC) No 1185/2009 of the European Parliament 
and of the Council of 25 November 2009 concerning statistics on pesticides 
 
 
2 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Article 7 of Regulation (EC) No 1185/2009 (hereinafter referred to as the Regulation) of the 
European Parliament and of the Council concerning statistics on pesticides
1
 stipulates that: 
‘The Commission shall submit a report on the implementation of this Regulation to the 
European Parliament and the Council every five years. This report shall evaluate in 
particular the quality of data transmitted, as referred to in Article 4, the data collection 
methods, the burden on businesses, agricultural holdings and national administrations and 
the usefulness of these statistics in the context of the Thematic Strategy on the Sustainable 
Use of Pesticides in particular with regard to the objectives set out in Article 1. It shall, if 
appropriate, contain proposals designed to further improve data quality and data collection 
methods thereby improving the coverage and comparability of data and reducing the burden 
on businesses, agricultural holdings, and national administrations. The first report shall be 
submitted by 31 December 2016.’ 
 
2. COVERAGE AND CONTENT 
According to Article 2 (a) of the Regulation, ‘pesticides’ refer to ‘a plant protection product 
(PPP) as defined in Article 2(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1107/20092 or to a biocidal product as 
defined in Article 2(1) of Directive 98/8/EC’3. The Regulation stipulates that the Member 
States have to transmit annually to the Commission their statistical data on pesticides placed 
on the market each year (pesticide sales statistics). In addition, they have to provide statistics 
on pesticides used in agriculture (pesticide use statistics) in five-year periods. The data should 
include confidential data. The Member States also have to provide the Commission with 
reports on the quality of the data transmitted, and the Commission in turn has to assess the 
quality of this data. 
 
2.1. Pesticide sales statistics 
For pesticides placed on the market, the reference period is the calendar year. The first 
reference period was the second calendar year following 30 December 2009. Data is to be 
transmitted within 12 months of the end of the reference year, while the quality reports are 
due 3 months later. The data and quality reports transmitted so far cover reference years 2011 
to 2014 inclusive. 
 
                                                            
1 OJ L 324, 10.12.2009, p. 4. 
2  Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 
concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market and repealing Council Directives 
79/117/EEC and 91/414/EEC  (OJ L 309, 24.11.2009, p.1). 
3  OJ L 123, 24.4.1998, p. 1. Please note that Directive 98/8/EC has been repealed with effect from 1 
September 2013 by Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
22 May 2012 concerning the making available on the market and use of biocidal products (OJ L 167, 
27.6.2012, p. 1). 
References to the repealed Directive shall be construed as references to Regulation EU) No 528/2012. 
 
 
3 
 
2.2. Pesticide use statistics 
For statistics on the use of pesticides in agriculture, the reference period must be a period of a 
maximum of 12 months within each five-year period. The first five-year period started in the 
first calendar year following 30 December 2009. These data and quality reports are expected 
within 12 months of the end of each five-year period. The transmission of the data and 
quality reports of the first five-year period (reference years 2010-2014 inclusive) thus 
concluded in December 2015. 
 
For both sets of data, the Commission (Eurostat) must aggregate the data before publication, 
taking due account to protect confidential data from the Member States. This means that the 
Commission (Eurostat) cannot provide any statistics on individual active substances. 
 
The following chapters provide an overall assessment of the quality of the pesticide sales data 
transmitted by the Member States. This assessment is generated from the quality reports 
provided by the Member States as required by Article 4 of the Regulation. The quality criteria 
applied are laid down in Article 12(1) Statistical quality of Regulation (EC) No 223/2009
4
. 
The validation of the quality reports for the pesticide use statistics has not yet been finalised, 
and they are therefore not analysed below. 
 
2.3. Data collection methods and sources 
For most of the 28 Member States, and Norway, all underlying primary data on pesticide 
sales are derived from administrative sources for which reporting is obligatory under law. All 
countries except Denmark, Slovenia and Norway consider all information related to 
individual respondents as confidential. Most countries have no public databases, and 
aggregated data is usually available in statistical publications and/or web pages. In Belgium 
and Norway individual data is available on request. As Switzerland has a derogation, no 
quality reports are available. For more details, see Annex I. 
 
2.4. Quality of transmitted data 
All Member States, Switzerland and Norway are compliant on the coverage and timeliness of 
their data. Most countries provide their data sets on time and react in a spirit of good 
cooperation when further checks or corrections are required. 
 
Concerning accuracy, reliability, and comparability, most countries stated that since their 
primary pesticide sales data was collected from administrative sources or from the 
                                                            
4  Regulation (EC) No 223/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 March 2009 on 
European statistics and repealing Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1101/2008 of the European Parliament 
and of the Council on the transmission of data subject to statistical confidentiality to the Statistical 
Office of the European Communities, Council Regulation (EC) No 322/97 on Community Statistics, 
and Council Decision 89/382/EEC, Euratom establishing a Committee on the Statistical Programmes of 
the European Communities (OJ L 87, 31.3.2009, p. 164) 
 
 
4 
 
authorisation holders, they considered that the data supplied was accurate. In addition, 
sampling errors were not relevant, since only the actual administrative values were collected 
and estimates or samples were not used. However, different methods of data collection were 
used. 
 
The Commission therefore considers that all primary pesticide sales data is accurate and 
reliable, since there were no computations or estimates of the values that the statistics were 
intended to measure. As a consequence, the aggregated pesticide sales data is also considered 
accurate and reliable. 
 
In general, most countries reported taking the following precautionary measures to ensure the 
statistical quality required of their data: 
• frequently reviewing and updating their questionnaires; 
• taking account of problems reported and recommendations made by respondents 
in previous years; 
• using a complete directory of authorised products; 
• subjecting the data to internal quality control processes; 
• storing the data in secure environments wherever it is protected by statistical 
confidentiality. 
 
Pesticide sales data provides a good quality estimate of the total quantity of pesticide 
products placed on the market on a national basis. It can show trends in new types of 
pesticides, quantities of products over time and the subsequent risks for people and the 
environment. Such estimates could be improved in future by distinguishing between 
professional and 'home & garden' authorisations (i.e. for agricultural and non-agricultural 
purposes, respectively). Additional checks on data quality could also be envisaged for the 
volumes of remaining stocks. For more information, see Annex II. 
 
3. RELEVANCE — USEFULNESS OF THE STATISTICAL DATA AND DISSEMINATION 
3.1. Information received from stakeholders 
Consultations with relevant Commission's services and agencies have brought forward the 
following important points for consideration: 
 
 Any legislation on pesticides statistics should cater for harmonised risk indicators, 
which the Commission has to draw up under Article 15 of the Sustainable Use 
Directive (SUD)5, and should facilitate the calculation of risk indicators ‘by using the 
statistical data collected’. The task of collecting the statistical data on pesticides 
cannot be seen as completely separate from the task of using these data for calculating 
risk. It would seem logical that the risk indicators should be known first, before any 
                                                            
5  Directive 2009/128/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 establishing 
a framework for Community action to achieve the sustainable use of pesticides. (OJ L 309, 24.11.2009, 
p. 71) 
 
5 
 
decision is taken on the data to be collected for this purpose. Further discussions are 
deemed necessary and Member States shall also be consulted in the SUD working 
group. 
 Stakeholders suggest to adapt the legislation so that figures aggregated at a lower 
level can be released, as they could be needed for calculating risk indicators. The 
difficulty of collecting meaningful data on pesticides use from farmers, and the costs 
to Member States of doing so has been acknowledged as well as the difficulty to reach 
an EU-wide agreement on which crops are relevant as these can differ considerably 
between the different climatic zones in Europe. 
 
 Pesticides are a cause of pollution and have a direct effect especially on the state of 
biodiversity, water bodies, and soils. To ensure that these impacts are addressed 
appropriately, it is essential that policymakers are able to quantify the risk and the 
level of pesticide pollution. This would also aid the better implementation of existing 
environmental policy tools and serve to identify the remaining policy gaps for 
addressing the environmental pressures caused by pesticides. Currently, the policies 
concerned by the data needs are the EU Biodiversity Strategy 2020, the common 
agricultural policy (CAP), the Water Framework Directive, and the Thematic Strategy 
on Soils.  
 
 Pesticide statistics are too aggregated to effectively inform environmental risk 
assessment. A robust analysis of the impacts of pesticide application on ecosystems 
would require data on which specific active substances in pesticides are applied to 
which crops, as well as information on the types of ecosystems in which those crops 
are sited. Data on hazard, i.e. (eco)toxicological properties, is specific to active 
substances. Thus, the only way to effectively combine hazard data with data on 
exposure in order to understand risk is to have data on the application rates for 
specific active substances in pesticides by crop, area and ecosystem type. In addition, 
cumulative risk assessment methods, would need to be applied to provide an 
understanding of how the mixtures of active substances, safeners and synergists 
interact to generate combined effects in pesticides.  
 
 The Regulation does not require information from the Member States on the type of 
ecosystem where substances are applied. The impact of mixtures of active substances 
on the ecosystem in which a crop is situated depends on the characteristics of that 
ecosystem, including both biotic and abiotic features. The 'mapping and assessment of 
ecosystems and their services' project6 provides an agreed typology of ecosystems. 
This typology could serve as a basis for Member States reporting on pesticides 
application by ecosystem type, and enrich our understanding of the risks of pesticides 
to the environment. A robust analysis of risks to the environment associated with 
pesticides is required to support the comparative assessment of candidates for 
substitution as required under Article 50 of Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009 
                                                            
6  http://biodiversity.europa.eu/maes 
 
6 
 
concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market. This is not possible 
with the data currently available. 
 
 Should pesticides statistics become available at a sufficient level of detail, they could 
be extremely useful for conducting retrospective risk assessments of the actual levels 
of risk expected from the overall use of pesticides in the EU, for human and animal 
health, and the environment. This would allow the estimation of trends based on risk 
to complement those on sales. As each pesticide active substance has a different 
toxicity and likelihood for exposure, trends based on their risk to human and animal 
health and the different non-target organism groups could be highly valuable for 
supporting EU policies on public health, consumer protection, animal health and 
environmental protection. Such assessments would complement the annual 
assessments of the risk to consumers from the levels of pesticide residues monitored 
by the Member States. 
 
 A balance between confidentiality and the relevance or usefulness of the data could be 
achieved by exploring different aggregation options, for example based on toxicity 
and use patterns. Consequently dialogue is suggested between the Commission's 
services, agencies, and other relevant actors to explore options that could help 
maximise the relevance and usefulness of the data in the future. 
 
3.2. Studies on non-agricultural use of pesticides 
Agriculture is the most obvious and probably the largest professional sector using pesticides. 
However, other professional or amateur users may also contribute more or less significantly 
to the total amount of pesticides used. A comparison of the quantities of pesticides used in 
agriculture with the overall amount placed on the market is envisaged in the quality report 
that will accompany the data on pesticide use in agriculture. The Regulation covers both 
annual statistics on the placing on the market of pesticides and statistics on agricultural use of 
pesticides. There is a lack of consistency between these two sets as there is no information on 
pesticides used for non-agricultural purposes. This was also noted in the negotiations 
preceding the approval of the Regulation, and so an indent was added in Section 6 (Quality 
reports) of Annex II of the Regulation: ‘– a summary description of the commercial non-
agricultural uses of pesticides obtained in the framework of pilot studies to be led by the 
Commission’. 
 
 
7 
 
Figure 1. Overview of different uses of pesticides 
 
 
 
 
 
In 2011 the Commission awarded grants for pilot studies to estimate both commercial and 
non-commercial non-agricultural use of pesticides. Five countries (Belgium, Italy, Lithuania, 
Latvia and Romania) applied for grants. In addition, the Commission is aware that such 
surveys have been carried out in the Netherlands and the United Kingdom. 
 
The pilot surveys focused on sectors such as: 
- landscaped areas or gardens, outdoor leisure areas, parks; 
- sports, leisure areas and facilities; 
- railways; 
- highways and roads; 
- airports and seaports; 
- archaeological sites; 
- kitchen garden growers /hobby farmers; 
- state forests; 
- gardens and parks; 
- others. 
 
The main lessons learned from earlier action and from the pilot studies are the following: 
1. there is a huge diversity of patterns of non-agricultural uses of pesticides among 
the Member States or even between national regions; 
2. predominant sectors of use can be identified and are common to most Member 
States; 
3. a limited list of active substances is associated with the predominant uses; 
4. the different sectors of use require different methods of data collection or a 
combination of methods. 
 
Besides the apparent diversity of national or regional situations, certain major actors are 
common to all Member States and should be the basis for all surveys on the use of pesticides 
in the non-agricultural sectors. These are: 
1. residential areas (including home & gardening); 
All pesticide uses 
Professional uses  Non-professional uses 
Agricultural uses Non-agricultural uses 
 
8 
 
2. public areas (including golf courses); 
3. industrial areas; 
4. infrastructure; 
5. forests 
 
These sectors of activity should be covered as a priority and should be the basis for 
comparing statistics on non-agricultural pesticide uses between Member States or regions. 
 
3.3. Extending the scope of the Regulation 
Recital (5) of the Regulation anticipates that the scope will be extended to cover biocidal 
products. In its report 7 on the sustainable use of biocides, the Commission has stated that it 
does not seem appropriate to simply extend the scope of the SUD to biocidal products. For 
that reason, the Commission also finds it unnecessary to extend the scope of the Regulation to 
biocidal products, even if this was the initial intention. 
 
4. COST AND BURDEN 
The costs and administrative burden of the surveys depend greatly on the survey method 
chosen. 
 
The pesticide sales statistics rely in many Member States on the administrative data kept by 
the pesticide authorities or the authorisation holders (see Annex I). This means that the costs 
relate to contacting the authorities or the often quite limited number of authorisation holders 
to request the data, and then to processing it. While no actual numbers are available from all 
Member States, both the number of working days involved and actual costs are reported to be 
quite low in most cases. The costs and the burden to the reporting units are also reported to be 
quite reasonable, since the data required has to be recorded anyway as stipulated in 
Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009.  
 
The pesticide use statistics require the information to be recorded at farm level, which leads 
to a higher burden. This means that a sample has to be set up, questionnaires prepared and 
interviewers or letters sent if an electronic collection system has not been developed. The 
total costs are heavily dependent on the method chosen, which can also be seen from the 
information transmitted to the Commission. No direct conclusions can be drawn from the 
reports on the costs involved as the information is not sufficiently detailed for this purpose.  
 
As explained, the information in most countries comes directly from farmers. Under 
Regulation (EC) No 1107/2009, professional users (farmers or entrepreneurs) must keep 
accounts of their use of pesticides. This means that the information should be readily at hand 
when the farmer has to answer the interviewer or fill in the questionnaire. This is mirrored in 
                                                            
7 COM (2016) 151 
(http://ec.europa.eu/health/biocides/docs/2016_report_sustainableuse_biocides_en.pdf.) 
 
9 
 
the quality reports, which in many cases show that limited time — from 15 minutes to about 
2 hours per survey (every 5 years) — is needed on farms to complete the surveys. 
 
5. EXPERIENCE FROM THE FIRST FIVE YEARS 
Data on pesticide sales have been transmitted annually since December 2012 (2011 data). 
Despite some initial technical issues within the Commission, the processes are now mature 
and run well. The first data on the agricultural use of pesticides was transmitted to the 
Commission at the end of 2015. To this date, due to the very large volume of complex data, it 
has not been possible to fully process the data, which means it is not yet available to users. 
Consequently, no assessment of its usefulness has been made yet. Despite this, some 
observed weaknesses and recommendations are given below. 
 
5.1. Availability of detailed pesticide data 
The Regulation prohibits the disclosure of data on individual active substances. According to 
Article 3(4) .: ‘For reasons of confidentiality, the Commission (Eurostat) shall aggregate the 
data before publication in accordance with the chemical classes or categories of products 
indicated in Annex III, taking due account of the protection of confidential data at the level of 
individual Member State. The confidential data shall be used by national authorities and by 
the Commission (Eurostat) exclusively for statistical purposes, in accordance with Article 20 
of Regulation (EC) No 223/2009.’ 
 
Consequently, the Commission cannot publish data on individual active substances. In 
addition, the aggregated data cannot always be disseminated if there is a direct or indirect risk 
of statistical units being identified, this is the general rule in statistics to protect data privacy. 
 
If the sales statistics would be collected from retail sellers, there would be a high number of 
statistical units, giving little cause for data confidentiality issues. However, it has become 
apparent that most Member States collect the data directly from authorisation holders. This is 
done either in the form of administrative data that have been transmitted to the pesticide 
authorities, or through a questionnaire. For most active substances, this means that there is 
only one data provider, which leads to the information being confidential. As there are many 
classes with only a few substances, or the producer/importer is the same for many of the 
substances in the group, this has led to a situation where a considerable amount of aggregated 
data at higher levels is also confidential. The Commission considers that the sales data legally 
required by the Regulation is being collected successfully and transmitted to the Commission 
by the countries. It also considers that the overall quality of the data is good. However, the 
application of the confidentiality rules to a substantial share of the data decreases the value of 
the statistical information provided to users. It therefore cannot be assumed that users’ needs 
are being well served by the Regulation. 
 
10 
 
5.2. Pesticide sales statistics 
Comparing sales of pesticides between countries and over years is not straightforward 
because external factors such as climatic conditions, soils and production methods can have a 
big impact on the types and volumes of pesticides needed. 
 
Where a product is sold may not be where it is ultimately applied, and pesticides may also be 
sold directly to farmers by retail sellers in neighbouring countries. This may represent a small 
fraction of the total pesticides sales, but these quantities are not reflected correctly in the sales 
statistics. There can also be a delay between the sale of the pesticide and its use, depending 
on whether it is bought for stock or for direct use. 
 
Many users would like to obtain detailed data on the volumes of individual active substances 
sold. However, neither the Commission nor the national statistics institutes can provide this 
information as they have to comply with the Regulation and the confidentiality rules. 
 
The Regulation is, as described above, very restrictive in how the Commission may 
disseminate the data. All data has to be aggregated into classes and groups, regardless of 
whether or not the data is deemed confidential by the Member States. Moreover, the 
Commission cannot deviate from the classes established in Annex III to the Regulation.  
 
As users are often interested in specific active substances or groups of substances that differ 
from the predefined classes, the Regulation could be seen as too restrictive; it does not allow 
the proper analyses to be carried out. A good example is the recent discussions on 
neonicotinoids, the group of pesticides that are potentially causing damage to bees. The 
active substances concerned are not all in the same chemical classes in Annex III, which 
means that the Commission has not been able to provide all relevant data to the policy 
makers.  
 
The Regulation stipulates that the only unit to use is the weight but biological pesticides 
should not be expressed in weight but in 'colony forming units'. This creates problems both 
for the data providers and the users of the data, as the data provided makes no sense or have 
to be transformed before data transmission and use. This purely technical issue needs to be 
developed further. 
 
5.3. Pesticide use statistics 
The Regulation provides that for the statistics on agricultural use of pesticides, each Member 
State has to decide on a selection of crops to be covered during the five-year reference period 
that is representative of the crops cultivated in that Member State and of the substances used. 
The selection of crops has to include those most relevant for the national pesticide action 
plans. However, as national action plans do not always contain any reference to the most 
relevant crops, the choice of crops has been quite diverse. This has led to a situation where 
 
11 
 
there is a risk that it will not be possible to fully compare data on pesticide use on crops 
between countries.   
 
The reference period has to be a maximum of 12 months covering all plant protection 
treatments associated directly or indirectly with the crop, during a five-year period. Member 
States may choose the reference period at any time of the five-year period and the choice can 
be made independently for each selected crop. This has led to a situation where countries 
have chosen different reference periods and thus it will potentially not be possible to compare 
data for the same year between countries, nor to give any EU-level results. 
 
6. PROPOSALS FOR FURTHER IMPROVEMENTS 
The Commission, taking into account the opinion of the relevant stakeholders, considers it 
important to further adapt the legislation on pesticides sales, so that all data that is not 
confidential can be made available to the public both as active substance, as well as in 
different forms of aggregation.  
 
The Commission considers it equally important to adapt further the legislation on pesticides 
use statistics to ensure a more consistent approach and coverage across the Member States. 
This could include specified common reference periods and clear coverage requirements for 
the crops to be surveyed. The coverage rules could be based on the crop production statistics 
(a certain percentage of arable and permanent crops could be covered) and on analyses of the 
potential risks to the environment and human health, based on the sales of active substances. 
These rules would be set up in close collaboration between the relevant Commission's 
services and agencies and with national experts. 
 
Finally, the Commission has, together with stakeholders, drafted a strategy for agricultural 
statistics for 2020 and beyond8. The strategy suggests that all agricultural statistics, except the 
Economic Accounts for Agriculture, should be grouped under two framework regulations. 
The Commission strongly recommends that pesticide statistics should be also merged with 
the other agricultural statistics domains.  
                                                            
8  Strategy for agricultural statistics 2020 and beyond - Final. 
 
12 
 
ANNEX I 
The information presented in this Annex is based on the national quality reports provided by 
the countries according to the Regulation 
 
RESPONSIBLE NATIONAL 
AUTHORITIES FOR PESTICIDES 
SALES 
DATA COLLECTION METHODS FOR PESTICIDES SALES 
BE 
Federal Public Service of Health, 
Food Chain Safety and 
Environment 
Administrative data; authorisation holders (producers, 
importers and exporters) are required to declare the 
amounts placed on the market 
BG Ministry of Agriculture and Food 
Administrative data based on declarations by the authorised 
distributors 
CZ Czech Statistical Office 
Administrative data; entrepreneurs who place products on 
the market or store them for export to third countries are 
obliged to report to the Central Institute for Supervising and 
Testing in Agriculture (CISTA). The data collection is done 
online and/or through paper questionnaires  
DK 
Danish Environmental Protection 
Agency, Ministry of Environment 
and Food of Denmark 
Administrative data. Obligatory reporting by Danish 
authorisation holders electronically and foreign ones by 
email 
DE 
Federal Office of Consumer 
Protection and Food Safety (BVL) 
Administrative data; authorisation holders (including 
holders of parallel trade permits), manufacturers and 
distributors are required to report the amounts sold 
nationally or exported, including sales for emergency 
situations 
EE Statistics Estonia 
Census survey of all importers and suppliers by web 
application and/or through paper-based postal survey 
IE 
Department of Agriculture, Food 
and the Marine 
The data is collected on a census basis. The administrative 
data is sourced from all the product authorisation 
holders and marketing companies 
EL 
Hellenic Statistical Authority 
(ELSTAT) 
Statistical survey of all sellers within the national territory 
conducted by the Ministry of Rural Development and Food, 
by letter or email. Since 2014 sellers have been obliged to 
record the data online  
ES 
Ministry of Agriculture, Food 
and  Environment 
Electronic questionnaire/survey (within and outside the 
national territory) of authorised holders and respondents to 
whom the commercialisation rights have been transferred. 
Administrative data is provided by S.G. Sanidad Vegetal 
 
13 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE NATIONAL 
AUTHORITIES FOR PESTICIDES 
SALES 
DATA COLLECTION METHODS FOR PESTICIDES SALES 
FR 
Ministry of Agriculture, Food and 
Forestry 
Administrative data; distributors are obliged to declare sales 
to the water agencies. The sales figures are then further 
processed by the Ministry of the Environment 
HR Croatian Bureau of Statistics  
Administrative data; the Ministry of Agriculture is 
responsible for collecting data from distributors and sales 
points 
IT 
Italian National Institute of 
Statistics (ISTAT) 
Postal census survey of all distributors  
CY 
Statistical Service of Cyprus 
(CYSTAT) 
Postal or electronic questionnaire/survey of suppliers.   
Administrative data is provided by the Ministry of 
Agriculture 
LV 
State Plant Protection Service of 
Latvia (SPPS) 
Full survey (paper and/or electronic) of all respondents — 
distributors 
LT Statistics Lithuania Full survey of all producers and authorisation holders 
LU 
Institut National de la Statistique 
et des Etudes Economiques 
(STATEC) 
Census of vendors (retailers or wholesalers) and 
cooperatives 
HU 
Hungarian Central Statistical 
Office 
The National Food Chain Safety Office (Ministry of Rural 
Development) collects the data from authorisation holders  
MT National Statistics Office (NSO) Online census survey of authorised importers 
NL Statistics Netherlands 
Administrative data obtained from the Plant Protection 
Office (NVWA) 
AT 
Statistics Austria (STAT), Austrian 
Agency for Health and Food 
Safety (AGES) 
Authorisation; approval holders and distributors are obliged 
to report data to the Austrian Federal Office for Food Safety 
PL Central Statistical Office 
Full-scale survey conducted in cooperation with the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Rural Development and with the Institute 
of Plant Protection — National Research Institute 
PT 
Statistics Portugal (INE), National 
Authority (DGAV) 
Administrative data is obtained from the National Authority 
Direção Geral de Alimentação e Veterinária (DGAV)  
 
14 
 
 
RESPONSIBLE NATIONAL 
AUTHORITIES FOR PESTICIDES 
SALES 
DATA COLLECTION METHODS FOR PESTICIDES SALES 
RO National Institute of Statistics 
A census survey based on face-to-face interviews, 
conducted in cooperation with the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural Development (National Plant Protection Agency). 
It covers certified selling units, economic operators and 
natural persons 
SI 
Statistical Office of the Republic 
of Slovenia 
Administrative data reported to the Administration of the 
Republic of Slovenia for Food Safety, Veterinary Medicine 
and Plant Protection (UVHVVR) 
SK 
Statistical Office of the Slovak 
Republic (SOSR) 
Administrative data; the Central Controlling and Testing 
Institute in Agriculture (CCTIA) collects data from 
authorisation holders or parallel trade permit holders 
FI 
Finnish Safety and Chemicals 
Agency (Tukes) 
The Finnish Safety and Chemicals Agency (Tukes) collects 
data by mail or email from authorisation holders or their 
representatives 
SE Swedish Chemicals Agency (KemI) The agency gathers data from authorisation holders 
UK Chemicals Regulation Directorate 
Voluntary, electronic census of businesses conducted by the 
British Crop Production Council on behalf of the Office for 
National Statistics (ONS) 
NO Norwegian Food Safety Authority Administrative data from importers and producers 
 
  
 
15 
 
ANNEX II 
The information presented in this Annex is based on the national quality reports provided by 
the countries according to the Regulation  
 
QUALITY OF PESTICIDES SALES DATA 
TRANSMITTED  
USEFULNESS OF PESTICIDES SALES STATISTICS 
BE 
No estimates are required and 
overestimates are rather unlikely due to the 
association between declared data and fees 
The data is used to calculate the annual fee for 
placing pesticides on the market and to estimate 
the overall quantities used at national level and 
the subsequent risks for man and the 
environment  
BG 
The data is comprehensive and covers all 
available exports and imports 
The data is specific, with only a few potential 
users 
CZ 
The sources cover all units legally obliged to 
report and all products placed on the market 
The data is used mainly by CISTA for 
phytosanitary control purposes, planning and 
carrying out checks on distributors’ compliance  
DK 
The amount of sales is reported as the total 
amount of the sale of each product 
Users are politicians, agriculture, NGOs and the 
public.  
Uses of the data include monitoring the target of 
reducing the pesticide load by 40 % by the end of 
2015 compared with 2011 (Danish Pesticide 
strategy 2013-2015, now prolonged by 1 year) 
DE 
The overall accuracy of the data is 
considered satisfactory, although non-
response mainly due to incorrect contact 
details of parallel trade companies could be 
a problem. Under-coverage due to illegal 
trade cannot be estimated  
The Federal Office of Consumer Protection and 
Food Safety (BVL) uses the data for internal post-
registration monitoring tasks. Data is also 
published in the German Statistical Yearbook on 
Food, Agriculture and Forestry and in the Federal 
Gazette (‘Bundesanzeiger’). The Julius Kühn 
Institut (JKI), the Federal Research Centre for 
Cultivated Plants, also receives this data. Other 
authorities, e.g. the Federal Environmental 
Agency (UBA) or research institutions, are 
provided with substance-specific sales data on 
request  
EE 
The quality of the statistics is quite high 
because all sales companies are covered and 
the response rate was high 
Users include the Agricultural Board, the 
Agricultural Research Centre, the Ministry of 
Agriculture, other ministries, research and 
education institutions, the media, other 
organisations and companies, and  private 
individuals  
 
16 
 
 
QUALITY OF PESTICIDES SALES DATA 
TRANSMITTED  
USEFULNESS OF PESTICIDES SALES STATISTICS 
IE 
Data returned from the product 
authorisation holders and marketing 
companies is the actual real figure involved. 
Consequently the quality of the data is 
considered to be high 
Only a few requests for this data have ever been 
received. Companies and authorisation holders 
have access to this register and can view 
information for each product  
EL 
The implementation of the online system 
has improved the overall quality. In 
particular it has raised the response rates 
from the low levels seen in the past 
The Ministry of Rural Development and Food, the 
government, the press, the media and academic 
researchers use this data to reduce the risks 
associated with pesticides 
ES 
The data is subjected to an internal 
consistency process 
To assess the impact of public policies and 
calculate relevant health indicators and 
associated environmental risks  
FR 
The declaration system covers sales to end-
users (or purchases abroad by end-users). 
This prevents double counting linked to 
authorisation transfers or intermediaries in 
the sale chain  
We are not currently aware of any specific user 
needs 
HR no information provided by the country 
Data users are state bodies, local governments 
and legal and natural persons  
IT Quite satisfactory 
Data is mainly used by the Institute for 
Environmental Protection and Research (ISPRA) 
and the Ministry of Agriculture to assess risks to 
man and the environment 
CY 
The survey was exhaustive with full coverage 
as there were only a few suppliers in the 
country 
The data meets the needs of the Ministry of 
Agriculture 
LV 
The overall quality of the statistical output is 
assessed as good. The main strength of the 
process is that the data collection is based 
on legislation 
Mostly scientists, students and the media have 
shown interest in the data. The statistical 
information superficially satisfies national user 
needs 
LT 
The data is collected from reliable sources 
applying high methodological standards 
The main users are state and municipal 
authorities and agencies, international 
organisations, the media, research and business 
communities and students. The data is used to 
identify potential risks to human health and the 
environment 
 
17 
 
 
QUALITY OF PESTICIDES SALES DATA 
TRANSMITTED  
USEFULNESS OF PESTICIDES SALES STATISTICS 
LU 
Respondents are also invited to indicate the 
shares of domestic and foreign suppliers or 
intermediaries in order to eliminate 
potential double counting between national 
wholesalers 
Sales statistics might be of interest to policy 
makers, the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry 
of Environment, environmental lobby groups and 
the research community 
HU 
Marketed quantities are compared to and 
cross-checked with data from previous years 
at product level 
no information provided by the country 
MT 
The overall quality is good. The data 
collection is exhaustive and detailed 
processes are in place to validate and 
analyse the data 
The European Commission is the main user 
NL 
The quality of the data is routinely reviewed 
using a framework that is based on the 
European Statistical System definition of 
quality 
The data is used to evaluate government policy 
AT no information provided by the country Supervision and control  
PL 
Obligatory survey of producers, national 
distributors and importers through 
electronic questionnaires 
Data users include central offices, scientific and 
research institutes, students and companies 
operating in the agricultural sector. The data may 
be used to assess the conditions and costs of 
agricultural production and the environmental 
impact  
PT 
Validations are based on comparisons of 
aggregated data with previous years  
The data is used to evaluate the market and its 
connection with sales authorisations by the 
national authority 
RO no information provided by the country 
Users include the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Rural Development, the National Plant Protection 
Agency, the Plant Protection Units, the Academy 
of Agricultural and Forestry Sciences, the 
National Institute Research and Development for 
Industrial Ecology, the Centre of Applied 
Biochemistry and Biotechnology, the Ministry of 
Environment, Waters and Forest, and the 
Institute of Research and Development for Plant 
Protection 
 
18 
 
 
QUALITY OF PESTICIDES SALES DATA 
TRANSMITTED  
USEFULNESS OF PESTICIDES SALES STATISTICS 
SI 
The data covers wholesalers within the 
national territory. However, the data cannot 
be disaggregated to lower territorial units as 
it does not allow any conclusions to be 
drawn on where the retail and actual use 
occurs 
Used as a proxy for the amounts of active 
substances used in agriculture 
SK 
The data is of good quality with sufficient 
accuracy and completeness 
The European Commission is the main user 
FI 
The quality of the data can be considered 
good  
Users of the data are agricultural, environmental, 
food safety and health authorities, research 
institutes, and the media. Detailed data has been 
submitted on request for research and 
monitoring purposes  
SE 
The data covers all products placed on the 
market. The data is processed manually and 
therefore there may be calculation errors 
We have very little information on users. Trends 
are often more interesting than the data itself 
UK 
The qualitative measure of accuracy is 
deemed acceptable. A multinational 
estimated to have approximately 8 % share 
of the UK market by volume is reported to 
have consistently refused to supply data. 
Other missing responses were not 
considered to be significant as most non-
responders are among the smaller players in 
the market 
Potential national users may include members of 
the Crop Protection Association. This is the UK 
trade association of companies engaged in the 
manufacture, formulation, development and 
national distribution of pesticides and crop 
protection products for agriculture, forestry, 
horticulture, home gardening, industrial and local 
authority outlets 
NO 
The data quality is considered very good. All 
imports and production have to be reported 
and confirmed by the companies’ 
accountants. Data estimates are not 
required 
The data is used as a basis for calculating the 
environmental tax. Users include government 
bodies, farmers associations, NGOs, industry etc. 
The data is available for both active substances 
and products. Users’ comments indicate a need 
for data at regional level, not only national level. 
However, this is not feasible due to the way the 
data is collected 
 
 
 
